README.md, before:

# node-redis-tools

### Tools for parsing, filtering and creating Redis RDB files

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/codeaholics/node-rdb-tools.png?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/codeaholics/node-rdb-tools)

This module currently provides a parser which understands Redis RDB files. In future it will also provide tools for modifying those files and re-creating them.

This parser is perfect for situations where you want to do analysis on your Redis data, but don't want to do it online on the server. Typically, if you have a Redis instance with many millions of keys, then doing a `keys *` or similar will block your server for a long time. In cases like these, taking a recent dump (or forcing a current one with `BGSAVE`) and then analysing that file offline is a useful technique.

The parser works as a Node "streams2" [transformer](http://nodejs.org/api/stream.html#stream_class_stream_transform). You feed it a stream of bytes (typically from `process.stdin` or a [file read stream](http://nodejs.org/api/fs.html#fs_fs_createreadstream_path_options)), and it produces a stream of objects representing your keys and values (and other miscellaneous structural information about the file).

## Installation

```bash
$ npm install rdb-tools
```

## Example

There is a script in the `bin` directory which dumps the contents of your RDB file to `stdout` as a series of JSON objects. It looks like this:

```javascript
var Parser = require('../rdb-tools').Parser,
    parser = new Parser(),
    Writable = require('stream').Writable;

var writable = new Writable({objectMode: true});
writable._write = function(chunk, encoding, cb) {
    console.log(chunk);
    cb();
};

// Deal cleanly with stdout suddenly closing (e.g. if piping through 'head')
process.stdout.on('error', function(err) {
    if (err.code === 'EPIPE') {
        process.exit(0);
    }
})

process.stdin.pipe(parser).pipe(writable);
```

Use it like this:

```bash
$ node script.js < myrdb.rdb
```

In this example, you can see we take `stdin`, pipe it through the parser and pipe the parser output into a `Writable` which dumps the object it receives to `stdout`. Note that the parser produces objects as output rather than `Buffers`. This means the downstream pipe components need `objectMode` set to `true`.

## Speed

On my laptop (a Lenovo X1 Carbon running Ubuntu 12.10 with a `Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-3667U CPU @ 2.00GHz` CPU), I can chew through around 20,000 - 25,000 keys per second. This performance is dependent on the types of data in your file. For example, keys with simple string values are much faster to parse than keys with large composite data structures (hashes, lists, sets, sorted sets). My laptop also has an SSD, so I'm not disk-bound, but I doubt disk speed is going to be an issue.

## Constructor options

```javascript
var parser = new Parser(options);
```

`options` is an object with the following:

*   `encoding`: the character encoding to use when converting to and from `String` (see below). Defaults to `utf8`.

## File formats

Redis RDB files come in a number of formats. [Sripathi Krishnan (@sripathikrishnan)](https://github.com/sripathikrishnan) does an excellent job of documenting the [internal structure](https://github.com/sripathikrishnan/redis-rdb-tools/blob/master/docs/RDB_File_Format.textile) and what the differences are between [different versions](https://github.com/sripathikrishnan/redis-rdb-tools/blob/master/docs/RDB_Version_History.textile).

The parser currently doesn't pay any attention to the version of the file format. It understands (almost) all of the structures that can be found in the file and will handle them appropriately.

## Output

As mentioned above, the parser produces objects as its output. The following objects are produced:

### Header

This object is produced when the "magic header" at the beginning of the file is parsed. It is of little use to downstream components, but is provided for completeness and in anticipation of creating an RDB writer component.

```javascript
{
    type: 'header',
    version: <version number - typically 6 for modern Redis installs>
}
```

### Database

This object is produced when a "database" record is found. This indicates that any subsequent keys belong to the given database. This object can be produced multiple times in the following sequence: `database: 0` `key-value` `key-value` `key-value` `database:1` `key-value` `key-value`, etc. Downstream components have little use for this object because the subsequent key objects also carry the database information.

```javascript
{
    type: 'database',
    database: <database number - typically 0-15>
}
```

### Key

This is the primary output of the parser. One key record is produced for each key-value pair found in the store.

```javascript
{
    type: 'key',
    database: <database number>,
    key: <string>,
    expiry: <number or undefined>,
    value: <see below>
}
```

`value` can have the following types depending on the underlying Redis datastructure:

*   Simple values are `Strings`
*   Lists and sets are `Arrays` of Strings
*   Hashes are `Objects` whose keys and values map to the keys and values of the Redis hash
*   Sorted sets (zsets) are `Objects` whose keys are the sorted set keys and whose values are the scores

#### String interpretation

Redis keys and values are "binary safe". This means that Redis treats them as just arrays of bytes and places no further interpretation on them - in particular it doesn't attempt to interpret them as strings with particular character encodings. (This isn't quite true, as Redis does understand keys and values which consist wholly of the ASCII characters '0'-'9' as in encodes them specially in RDB files and provides commands such as `INCR` and `HINCRBY` which understand the semantics of numeric values. But let's move on...)

Javascript isn't great with binary data. Early drafts of the parser produced keys and values as `Buffers`, but this was felt to be too restrictive to users of the parser. In particular, the Javascript `Object` is a natural mapping for Redis hashes, and this mapping wouldn't have been possible with `Buffers` as keys.

Therefore, the parser does two things which you'll probably never notice, but might do if you're making use of Redis's "binary safe" abilities!

1.  If a key or value is encoded in the RDB file using one of several special "numeric" encodings, the parser will interpret the number and convert it to a `String` in the output object
2.  All other keys and values are converted to `String`

The parser uses the character encoding specified on construction (default `utf8`) to interpret keys and values as `Strings` and to convert numeric keys and values to `Strings`.

In this way, the parser presents a consistent view of the Redis store - all primitives are `Strings`.

#### Expiry magic

RDB files have two different encodings of key expiry - either seconds or milliseconds since ["Unix epoch"](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_epoch).

For consistency, expiries are always presented to the user in milliseconds. If the key doesn't have an expiry, the expiry is `undefined`.

However... Redis stores milliseconds in an 8 byte (64 bit) number. Javascript doesn't support 64 bit numbers! Javascript numbers are all [IEEE 754 floating point](https://www.inkling.com/read/javascript-definitive-guide-david-flanagan-6th/chapter-3/numbers) numbers. These numbers can precisely represent all integers in the range &plusmn;2<sup>53</sup>. Numbers outside of this range start to lose precision.

A Javascript date can accept millisecond timestamps [up to 100,000,000 days from Unix epoch](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Date#Description).

100,000,000 days &times; 86,400,000 milliseconds / day = 8.64 &times; 10<sup>15</sup> &cong; 2<sup>53</sup>.

So, in practice, unless you are working with expiries out near Sep 13 275760, this probably won't be a problem for you!

### End

This object represents the end of the file (almost... a CRC may follow). It is of little use to downstream components.

```javascript
{
    type: 'end'
}
```

### CRC

Some versions of the RDB file format can contain a CRC checksum at the end of the file. If it is present and correctly validates the file data, the following object is produced:

```javascript
{
    type: 'crc'
}
```

Redis has a configuration option to disable the CRC (`rdbchecksum no`). If CRC is disabled, this object will still be produced.

## Known Issues

*   Doesn't support binary keys/values and likely never will. Get in touch if you REALLY need this...
*   Can't represent key expiries much beyond the year 275760. But if it could, you wouldn't be able to pass them to `Date()` ;-)
*   Doesn't support one of the possible encodings of sorted sets (see to do list, below).
*   If the file is truncated at just the right spot (between records), the parser will hang. The cause of this lies in an external library and is being investigated.
*   I suspect there are endianness issues on big endian hardware (particularly around my wrapping of the CRC code), but I don't have access to any to test!

## To do

- [ ] I don't believe any of the test RDB files have expiries in seconds (verify and create new test if necessary).
- [ ] All of the test RDBs claim to be version 3, even though many of them use features from later versions. Explicitly test later formats if possible.
- [ ] Sorted Set encoding is [not documented](https://github.com/sripathikrishnan/redis-rdb-tools/wiki/Redis-RDB-Dump-File-Format#sorted-set-encoding) and none of the test RDBs appear to use it. Is it obsoleted by more recent encodings for sorted sets?

## Acknowledgements

*   [@antirez](https://github.com/antirez) (Salvatore Sanfilippo) for creating Redis - I also used his CRC code for validating the RDB CRC.
*   [@sripathikrishnan](https://github.com/sripathikrishnan) (Sripathi Krishnan) for his [redis-rdb-tools](https://github.com/sripathikrishnan/redis-rdb-tools) project which inspired me to create this project. I also used his excellent set of test RDB files.
*   [@TooTallNate](https://github.com/TooTallNate) (Nathan Rajlich) for his [node-stream-parser](https://github.com/TooTallNate/node-stream-parser) library and for working through some bugs (in code and in my understanding!) with me.

## License

This software is provided under the [Apache License, Version 2.0](http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.html). See [LICENCE.txt](https://raw.github.com/codeaholics/node-rdb-tools/master/LICENSE.txt) in the source code for more details.

<pre>
Copyright 2013 Danny Yates

   Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
   you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
   You may obtain a copy of the License at

       http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

   Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
   distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
   WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
   See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
   limitations under the License.
</pre>

The CRC code is by Salvatore Sanfilippo ([@antirez](https://github.com/antirez)):

<pre>
Copyright (c) 2006-2012, Salvatore Sanfilippo
All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:

    * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
    * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
    * Neither the name of Redis nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
</pre>

Commit message:

Add the underlying Redis type to the output objects

README.md, after:

# node-redis-tools

### Tools for parsing, filtering and creating Redis RDB files

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/codeaholics/node-rdb-tools.png?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/codeaholics/node-rdb-tools)

This module currently provides a parser which understands Redis RDB files. In future it will also provide tools for modifying those files and re-creating them.

This parser is perfect for situations where you want to do analysis on your Redis data, but don't want to do it online on the server. Typically, if you have a Redis instance with many millions of keys, then doing a `keys *` or similar will block your server for a long time. In cases like these, taking a recent dump (or forcing a current one with `BGSAVE`) and then analysing that file offline is a useful technique.

The parser works as a Node "streams2" [transformer](http://nodejs.org/api/stream.html#stream_class_stream_transform). You feed it a stream of bytes (typically from `process.stdin` or a [file read stream](http://nodejs.org/api/fs.html#fs_fs_createreadstream_path_options)), and it produces a stream of objects representing your keys and values (and other miscellaneous structural information about the file).

## Installation

```bash
$ npm install rdb-tools
```

## Example

There is a script in the `bin` directory which dumps the contents of your RDB file to `stdout` as a series of JSON objects. It looks like this:

```javascript
var Parser = require('../rdb-tools').Parser,
    parser = new Parser(),
    Writable = require('stream').Writable;

var writable = new Writable({objectMode: true});
writable._write = function(chunk, encoding, cb) {
    console.log(chunk);
    cb();
};

// Deal cleanly with stdout suddenly closing (e.g. if piping through 'head')
process.stdout.on('error', function(err) {
    if (err.code === 'EPIPE') {
        process.exit(0);
    }
})

process.stdin.pipe(parser).pipe(writable);
```

Use it like this:

```bash
$ node script.js < myrdb.rdb
```

In this example, you can see we take `stdin`, pipe it through the parser and pipe the parser output into a `Writable` which dumps the object it receives to `stdout`. Note that the parser produces objects as output rather than `Buffers`. This means the downstream pipe components need `objectMode` set to `true`.

## Speed

On my laptop (a Lenovo X1 Carbon running Ubuntu 12.10 with a `Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-3667U CPU @ 2.00GHz` CPU), I can chew through around 20,000 - 25,000 keys per second. This performance is dependent on the types of data in your file. For example, keys with simple string values are much faster to parse than keys with large composite data structures (hashes, lists, sets, sorted sets). My laptop also has an SSD, so I'm not disk-bound, but I doubt disk speed is going to be an issue.

## Constructor options

```javascript
var parser = new Parser(options);
```

`options` is an object with the following:

*   `encoding`: the character encoding to use when converting to and from `String` (see below). Defaults to `utf8`.

## File formats

Redis RDB files come in a number of formats. [Sripathi Krishnan (@sripathikrishnan)](https://github.com/sripathikrishnan) does an excellent job of documenting the [internal structure](https://github.com/sripathikrishnan/redis-rdb-tools/blob/master/docs/RDB_File_Format.textile) and what the differences are between [different versions](https://github.com/sripathikrishnan/redis-rdb-tools/blob/master/docs/RDB_Version_History.textile).

The parser currently doesn't pay any attention to the version of the file format. It understands (almost) all of the structures that can be found in the file and will handle them appropriately.

## Output

As mentioned above, the parser produces objects as its output. The following objects are produced:

### Header

This object is produced when the "magic header" at the beginning of the file is parsed. It is of little use to downstream components, but is provided for completeness and in anticipation of creating an RDB writer component.

```javascript
{
    type: 'header',
    version: <version number - typically 6 for modern Redis installs>
}
```

### Database

This object is produced when a "database" record is found. This indicates that any subsequent keys belong to the given database. This object can be produced multiple times in the following sequence: `database: 0` `key-value` `key-value` `key-value` `database:1` `key-value` `key-value`, etc. Downstream components have little use for this object because the subsequent key objects also carry the database information.

```javascript
{
    type: 'database',
    database: <database number - typically 0-15>
}
```

### Key

This is the primary output of the parser. One key record is produced for each key-value pair found in the store.

```javascript
{
    type: 'key',
    rtype: <redis type>
    database: <database number>,
    key: <string>,
    expiry: <number or undefined>,
    value: <see below>
}
```

`rtype` contains the underlying Redis datatype and is one of: `string`, `list`, `set`, `zset` or `hash`

`value` can have the following types depending on the underlying Redis datastructure:

*   Simple values are `Strings`
*   Lists and sets are `Arrays` of Strings
*   Hashes are `Objects` whose keys and values map to the keys and values of the Redis hash
*   Sorted sets (zsets) are `Objects` whose keys are the sorted set keys and whose values are the scores

#### String interpretation

Redis keys and values are "binary safe". This means that Redis treats them as just arrays of bytes and places no further interpretation on them - in particular it doesn't attempt to interpret them as strings with particular character encodings. (This isn't quite true, as Redis does understand keys and values which consist wholly of the ASCII characters '0'-'9' as in encodes them specially in RDB files and provides commands such as `INCR` and `HINCRBY` which understand the semantics of numeric values. But let's move on...)

Javascript isn't great with binary data. Early drafts of the parser produced keys and values as `Buffers`, but this was felt to be too restrictive to users of the parser. In particular, the Javascript `Object` is a natural mapping for Redis hashes, and this mapping wouldn't have been possible with `Buffers` as keys.

Therefore, the parser does two things which you'll probably never notice, but might do if you're making use of Redis's "binary safe" abilities!

1.  If a key or value is encoded in the RDB file using one of several special "numeric" encodings, the parser will interpret the number and convert it to a `String` in the output object
2.  All other keys and values are converted to `String`

The parser uses the character encoding specified on construction (default `utf8`) to interpret keys and values as `Strings` and to convert numeric keys and values to `Strings`.

In this way, the parser presents a consistent view of the Redis store - all primitives are `Strings`.

#### Expiry magic

RDB files have two different encodings of key expiry - either seconds or milliseconds since ["Unix epoch"](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_epoch).

For consistency, expiries are always presented to the user in milliseconds. If the key doesn't have an expiry, the expiry is `undefined`.

However... Redis stores milliseconds in an 8 byte (64 bit) number. Javascript doesn't support 64 bit numbers! Javascript numbers are all [IEEE 754 floating point](https://www.inkling.com/read/javascript-definitive-guide-david-flanagan-6th/chapter-3/numbers) numbers. These numbers can precisely represent all integers in the range &plusmn;2<sup>53</sup>. Numbers outside of this range start to lose precision.

A Javascript date can accept millisecond timestamps [up to 100,000,000 days from Unix epoch](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Date#Description).

100,000,000 days &times; 86,400,000 milliseconds / day = 8.64 &times; 10<sup>15</sup> &cong; 2<sup>53</sup>.

So, in practice, unless you are working with expiries out near Sep 13 275760, this probably won't be a problem for you!

### End

This object represents the end of the file (almost... a CRC may follow). It is of little use to downstream components.

```javascript
{
    type: 'end'
}
```

### CRC

Some versions of the RDB file format can contain a CRC checksum at the end of the file. If it is present and correctly validates the file data, the following object is produced:

```javascript
{
    type: 'crc'
}
```

Redis has a configuration option to disable the CRC (`rdbchecksum no`). If CRC is disabled, this object will still be produced.

## Known Issues

*   Doesn't support binary keys/values and likely never will. Get in touch if you REALLY need this...
*   Can't represent key expiries much beyond the year 275760. But if it could, you wouldn't be able to pass them to `Date()` ;-)
*   Doesn't support one of the possible encodings of sorted sets (see to do list, below).
*   If the file is truncated at just the right spot (between records), the parser will hang. The cause of this lies in an external library and is being investigated.
*   I suspect there are endianness issues on big endian hardware (particularly around my wrapping of the CRC code), but I don't have access to any to test!

## To do

- [ ] I don't believe any of the test RDB files have expiries in seconds (verify and create new test if necessary).
- [ ] All of the test RDBs claim to be version 3, even though many of them use features from later versions. Explicitly test later formats if possible.
- [ ] Sorted Set encoding is [not documented](https://github.com/sripathikrishnan/redis-rdb-tools/wiki/Redis-RDB-Dump-File-Format#sorted-set-encoding) and none of the test RDBs appear to use it. Is it obsoleted by more recent encodings for sorted sets?

## Acknowledgements

*   [@antirez](https://github.com/antirez) (Salvatore Sanfilippo) for creating Redis - I also used his CRC code for validating the RDB CRC.
*   [@sripathikrishnan](https://github.com/sripathikrishnan) (Sripathi Krishnan) for his [redis-rdb-tools](https://github.com/sripathikrishnan/redis-rdb-tools) project which inspired me to create this project. I also used his excellent set of test RDB files.
*   [@TooTallNate](https://github.com/TooTallNate) (Nathan Rajlich) for his [node-stream-parser](https://github.com/TooTallNate/node-stream-parser) library and for working through some bugs (in code and in my understanding!) with me.

## License

This software is provided under the [Apache License, Version 2.0](http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.html). See [LICENCE.txt](https://raw.github.com/codeaholics/node-rdb-tools/master/LICENSE.txt) in the source code for more details.

<pre>
Copyright 2013 Danny Yates

   Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
   you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
   You may obtain a copy of the License at

       http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

   Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
   distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
   WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
   See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
   limitations under the License.
</pre>

The CRC code is by Salvatore Sanfilippo ([@antirez](https://github.com/antirez)):

<pre>
Copyright (c) 2006-2012, Salvatore Sanfilippo
All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:

    * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
    * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
    * Neither the name of Redis nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
</pre>
